I'm going to say something that's going
to sound like a cop out and I don't but
I can only phrase it this way.
I've annoyed people since I was so
small.
>> [music]
>> There are very few celebrity memoirs
I've been more eager to read than Lena
[music] Dunham's "Fame Sick".
>> I don't want to freak you out, but I
think that I may be the voice of my
generation.
>> Dunham was 25 when "Girls", the HBO
series she created and starred in,
premiered in 2012 and it since become a
true generational touchstone. "Girls"
follows four female friends navigating
their 20s [music] in New York City.
>> today.
>> The show was funny,
>> Look at me.
You smoke the crack?
You smoke just some crack?
>> sexually frank,
>> You find out I called him?
>> No.
>> Wait, you are, right?
>> Yes.
>> and divisive.
>> [music]
>> And what?
>> Get on
all fours.
>> And so was Dunham herself, [music] who
at the time generated huge amounts of
discourse.
She was scolded for being unself-aware,
an oversharer, privileged, [music] not
attractive enough, you name it. And
while she did have an unfortunate knack
for putting her foot in her mouth, in
retrospect, the sheer intensity of the
negative attention seems [music]
unfounded. In her memoir, Dunham reveals
her life was just as turbulent [music]
behind the scenes. She details how she
was concurrently dealing with drug
abuse, dysfunctional sexual
relationships, and [music] chronic
illness. It's a lot. And now, at nearly
40, she's ready to talk about it all.
Here's my conversation with Lena [music]
Dunham.
>> You know, it's
we were just making small talk here and
talking so nicely out in the hall, and
now I I just have a bunch of incredibly
heavy questions to ask you.
>> wait. I can't wait. You said that and I
was like, yeah, that seems right.
>> Yeah. Who whose name are you most
anxious about popping up in your inbox
and saying they've read the book?
>> Woo. I mean,
anytime you get feedback from someone
you've written about that you love or
have loved who isn't in your life
anymore, that's always uh
stressful name.
But honestly, like having my parents
read it was
the most anxiety-producing
part of the process because I knew they
were both going to fact-check, look at
it in a sort of like macro career arc
way because they're artists, will also
looking at it in a protective parents
way, will also looking at it in a
at their own depiction, and like waiting
through all of that. So, I feel like my
parents, when they popped up in my
inbox,
that was a that was a curl-up day.
>> And what was their response?
>> My father said one of the most amazing
things, which is he said,
"It's hard for me to understand why
anyone would want to publish a book such
as this." And the such as this And he
said,
"It's beautifully written.
I'm very proud of you.
Some people are going to really
understand it, connect to it, and feel
it's for them, and some people are going
to say, 'Why won't she shut the [__] up
already?'"
And I thought that was like a pretty
accurate assessment of the options,
and I I liked that.
>> Uh just on the on the idea that some
people will read it and understand it.
>> Yeah.
>> Um
you know, there
there's
so much in the book about, you know, uh
addiction,
>> Yeah.
>> you know,
traumatic physical things that have
happened to you, uh chronic illness, you
know, career ups and downs,
personal relationships, like
>> Yeah.
>> coming together and falling apart.
>> And
you're sort of amazingly candid about
this stuff.
And it's coming from someone who, I
think, has often been misunderstood.
Do you
have a a hope that, in publishing the
book
you will be
better understood by the public?
>> That's a really good question, and one
of the reasons I took so long to write
the book
was it was really important to me that I
not put it out from a place of saying
like here is a referendum on how I feel
that I have been perceived because I I
feel like every
two years they publish a new article
about a woman and they're like blank is
finally telling all.
Beep is finally herself.
ABC in her own words. And it's like like
in a lot of ways I think it's about
keeping a career arc alive.
And I wanted to make sure that in
publishing the book that I knew what my
own aims were and I don't like revenge
writing. I don't like like um writing
that's like
here I am kiss my ass. Like it's it was
really like hopefully I know there are
other people who will understand this
and more than ever before I feel that
I'm at peace with the fact that there
are people who will never understand and
and they don't need to.
>> Right at the beginning of the book, you
write about your name.
>> Lena Dunham.
>> Yeah.
>> And how uh you felt like your name
almost started just and this is for you
not even for other people. Your name for
you started to have carry negative
connotations. Like I think you say it
almost was like a sounded like a joke
that kind of felt like a slur or
something. So what did your name
represent, do you think?
>> Well, it became synonymous like there
was a period of time where I would be
watching just like a show I enjoyed and
then I would hear my own name and it
would take me like three minutes to
realize that there had been a joke that
was synonymous with whether it was like
myopic millennial thinking or
hapless feminism or
man hating or like liberal twitdom or
you know
>> It's a long list of course yeah.
>> and like [laughter] they're were the
people who maybe shared my politics and
shared my lifestyle but were irritated
that I was talking but suddenly I was
like it meant one thing to people who
did connect to me. It meant something to
it had a meaning and sort of an I mean I
was very
early
had an early experience of the alt-right
internet that I think
was very specific and then it also meant
something different to people who were
just like turning it into a sassy
punchline.
But I didn't feel I remember there was a
day and this is not in the book where I
was
going to vote with my father and I'd
been on the I'd been campaigning for
Obama. It was 2012.
And I remember he said like I don't know
maybe you should just go I don't know if
I want to go vote with like Lena Dunham.
And I was like my father
feels like going to vote with me is
going to like signal something when he
just is like a waspy man who wants to
get in and get out.
>> Right.
It's not like voting.
>> Yes, like he's like I don't want to go
and have it be like a whole thing where
we're voting together. And that
>> crazy.
>> Yeah, it's crazy. That's your father so
who's like my best friend in the world.
But he was saying basically can you just
go around the block and vote on your
own. And that was the moment when I kind
of understood something's going on here
cuz the show had only been on the air
for 6 months at that point.
>> And I mean
with the benefit of hindsight
what do you think that the
intensity [clears throat]
of sort of the the loathing
was which seemed so disproportionate.
Like you were a person that had a TV
show.
>> Yeah, it's crazy.
>> And and
you know the HBO numbers are not
network sitcom numbers.
>> That show was watched by like
if we think about it that show was
watched by like less than a million
people a week.
>> So what do you think that the depth of
that um
negative feeling was really about?
>> I mean, I'd be lying if I didn't say I
haven't spent time thinking about this
cuz you have to. It's you can't It can't
be avoided.
I'm going to say something that's going
to sound like a cop out and I don't but
I can only phrase it this way.
I have annoyed people since I was so
small. Like I was an annoying kid.
It was
truly at school. Like I was a try-hard.
I was loud. I was didn't always know how
to operate in like I didn't always know
how to like move through space with
other kids in a way that wasn't a little
bit off or disruptive.
And
one I remember one of my friends being
like, "But you've annoyed everybody
since preschool. Like what's go But I
also that's coupled with
there was like the intense rage about
the female sexuality on the show. There
was the intense rage about my body,
which is so crazy to look back on now
cuz I was this like little slip of a
26-year-old and had I known my own
powers, I would have behaved very
differently. Um and then like I would be
lying if I didn't say that my own way of
moving, whether it was through media or
how I sort of myself online or even in
my writing, didn't didn't quell it. And
then of course, as detailed in the book
like my all of that had an effect on my
health, my mental health, which then
began to deteriorate, which was a secret
I was trying to keep. And those secrets
are hard to keep.
>> Uh a second ago
you were saying, you know, you're when
you were 26 and just a slip of a person,
if if you had known your power, you
would have behaved differently. What did
you mean by that?
>> Great. Great zeroing in there. I guess
what I'm saying is that
I thought I was the most
the the feedback that I got, which was
like, this is uh the most ungainly
thing. This person is an eyesore. Like,
that's how I perceived myself. The show
was about somebody who had a negative
self-perception and made romantic
and and platonic choices that reflected
that.
And I guess something that is Listen,
would that we could all do our youth
over, but now that I'm going to be 40
years old, it's like
looking back, I looked at a lot of
photos and diaries and moments to put
the book together,
and I felt sad that that person didn't
have a sense that she It's not even just
about being normatively beautiful,
although like the I
although the way that I
was spoken about, I mean, that's what
so many women's bodies look like. That's
not what my body looks like anymore.
But it was
I was like full of light. And if And
it's interesting as I looked at the
photos over the course of the show, I
could see It's such a cliché, but it was
like the lights just went out.
>> It's clear from the book and even just,
you know, thinking back to how sometimes
you would respond to to critics online,
you know, you you were pretty aware of
the negativity that
was uh uh sort of circling around you
all the time online specifically. And um
I'm wondering if if you can talk about
like what the what the lure of engaging
with that negativity
was. Because And maybe it's a naive
thing to say, I I kind of wonder like,
why don't you just not go on the
internet?
>> You're right. And I remember my parents
used to say, that doesn't exist. If you
just shut your phone, it doesn't exist.
And I was really like, you guys don't
understand. This is a different world.
You check your email once a week.
But they were right. I think one of the
many contradictions of my life is that I
like to express myself in totality. I
like to
maybe do make things that
I never thought of anything that I made
as controversial, but I also
like I grew up in the New York art
world. Like I grew up going to see like
Vito Acconci do Seedbed. Like I wasn't
having an experience of any kind of
moralism, in fact the opposite. The idea
was like if you say it's art, it's art
and art is designed to like stretch the
human capacity for
understanding.
And so I
never thought of anything I did as
controversial. And then my feeling was,
well yeah, I like to make whatever I
want, but then I don't want anyone to
ever be upset with me. And so when it
came, I think that what it seemed like
at the time was that again that I was
always trying to explain myself to
people, not really realizing that
actually it was cyclical.
>> And And
What do you think it is about
either you or
people
>> Yeah.
>> that
that the
the negative stuff
even in the face of so much positive
affirmation you were getting
is is what
you know, is what sort of sticks with
you? Because the other, you know, you
you were
getting all this negative [__] all the
time, but also you were mid-20s, had a
had like a very buzzy popular show,
probably a lot of opportunities.
>> Yeah, I was incredibly rewarded for what
I did, you know?
>> So, why why doesn't why didn't that part
of it seem to stick?
>> A really great question, and I think
it's a human nature question.
Because
you know, one friend of mine who read
the book was like, you know, you reflect
so much on the relationships that were
painful, but like where are all the
people that
loved you and supported you and took
care of you? And
I hope that I mean, they're all in the
acknowledgements, but I was born with
such a healthy dose of guilt, shame, and
self-hatred, which is
in direct contrast to my
almost
pathological need to continuously
express myself, and that is like the
those things are dancing all the time.
>> You think you were born with a
self-hatred?
>> I mean,
not to get too woo-woo, but sometimes I
feel like we just are like
there's so much just
ancient generational stuff. It's like
>> MacLaine style or
>> No, I'm not going to go as far although
I respect Shirley MacLaine's work as and
I
>> Who Who wouldn't? Yeah.
>> And I'm not against going there,
but and you know, who hasn't tried past
life regression once if they're going
through something? But I guess, you
know, there's this
like pride mixed with this incredible
desire to like self-immolate and
self-erase, and I don't ever remember
not having it. So,
that makes me feel like it. And I don't
look at my parents and go,
"You guys did this to me." So, that
makes it a little bit of an existential
mystery.
>> Um
I have some questions that relate to
that, but I I'm going to cuz I have a
theory about this existential mystery
for you, but I'm going to save it. I'm
going to save it.
>> If David and Morpheus can explain me to
me, it would be
it would help me a lot and save me a lot
of money.
>> [laughter]
>> Well, you can make the check out to
cash. Okay, great.
>> But before that, you were
you're living through this period where
there was all this kind of um
distracting and and
painful noise in the outside world, and
you were having complicated
relationships with the people you were
working with.
>> Yeah.
and on top of that,
you were you were feeling unwell. You
were you were ill.
Um
how did
your health
affect
your relationships with the people
around you?
>> One of the reasons the book is called
Fame Sick is cuz the two most corrosive
forces in my relationships were
celebrity,
how it perverted the space around old
relationships, how it colored my ability
to understand new relationships and
whether they were authentic, and illness
because illness like fame
can make you
zero in and contract into self because
like
pain, physical pain, is like one of the
most selfish feelings that exist because
all you want is to be out of it. And
then also illness is really scary to
people. So,
they want a narrative in which you it
happen you had a cold for 3 days, you
recovered, you got appendicitis, they
took it out.
And the relentlessness of it and the
fact that it was like I was like, "Okay,
I got a surgery, I'm going to be
better." And then
3 months later, something and I didn't
have a sense of like medical misogyny. I
didn't have a sense of the I was raised
to be like
I'm a good Jewish girl and what doctors
tell me I listen to and to assume that
they were right.
And somehow my health picture kept
getting less clear, not more clear,
which also makes it very I understand
very hard for other people to empathize
with because it seems abstract,
amorphous,
like
>> And they lose sympathy or think that
you're making it up.
>> Yeah. And also, we live in a society
where the highest value for people
is like like movies that people come in
they're like, "I slept 2 hours, I drank
a coffee, I said bye to my wife, I'm
back." Like they treat it like an
extreme sport and the highest value is
just to be able to go and go and go.
And
it took me a really long time to
understand that wasn't like my only
value, that actually
I could have a fragile body and a strong
mind and have a lot to offer without um
like betraying my own physical self over
and over and over again, but it's still
a dance all the time.
>> You also
in addition to being chronically ill,
you had
multiple
traumatic bodily experiences, which I'm
really sorry that you
>> Thank you. Thank you.
>> You you but you you you you write about
being a child and and a babysitter
molesting you.
>> Yeah.
>> You write about abusive sexual
relationships.
>> Yeah.
>> And so
>> I'm like, yeah.
>> [laughter]
[gasps]
>> So how did
And and so all those
those
experiences, you know, what's the there
you know, I haven't didn't coin this
phrase, but the body keeps the score.
>> Yes.
>> All those experiences with your body had
you sort of
myriad emotional ripples. So how how did
your sense of your
body
affect
your sense your own sense of self?
>> [snorts]
>> It's a really
interesting. I mean,
I have a whole sort of theory of the
case about illness that would take a
long time. I was never a healthy kid
and often that was perceived as you
know, she just wants to lie in her bed
and like I really was always fighting
against like laziness label. Like I was
like, I will prove to you that is not
what I am
even if my body is a little floppy.
Those experiences
that you describe
created a distance between
myself and my body
that then made it hard to identify
quickly. It made it easy to separate
myself from pain and to keep moving, but
it made it hard to tune into my own body
and identify what was happening to me
physically. There's a book about EDS,
about Ehlers-Danlos syndrome, my sort of
kind of like overriding diagnosis, which
is called um The Body Is a Doorway by
Sophie Strand, and she said this thing
where she which I I couldn't believe
someone else was saying, but she said,
"I've always felt like
I was a balloon floating above my body."
And I had said that countless times and
had no idea that anybody else in the
world experienced that. You know, I once
had a really interesting conversation
with Gabor Maté, uh who's amazing
thinker. He was interviewing me for a
book that he wrote about the sort of
intersection between illness, addiction,
and trauma.
And he has like one of some of the most
developed, I think, thoughts about that
of anyone working.
And I asked him this question. I said,
like, "Why
I understand it happening once when I'm
a little kid, why does this keep
happening to me?"
>> What is the this in
>> The this is
finding myself
in situations where I am suddenly not in
control of what is happening to my body.
Another person is making the decisions.
And he said, "Lena, it's like
once you have that experience as a kid,
it's like like the weak wolf that gets
picked off the pack. Like, someone who
is looking for that sees you."
And it wasn't shaming. It wasn't It was
so beautifully put, which is like these
experiences build up in you, you develop
more distance from your body, people who
want to cross boundaries are able to
identify that you are someone who might
not
know how to deflect that.
And because before it felt like this
like series of unfortunate Lemony
Snicket series of unfortunate events,
and I needed some
like I needed some cohesion and I needed
some narrative cohesion to understand
why there was this like consistent
pattern of
feeling at least violated. And that was
really
soothing to me. And then
once you get sick, especially
gynecological illness, which is still
not like the most beloved topic in
American culture, we might say,
your feeling of yourself as a vital
young person is extremely diminished,
and your feeling of yourself as like a
viable partner is extremely diminished.
And it is also
a crazy hormonal ride, which So it's
There's a lot I hoped that in the book I
was able to capture those
different kind of um like buckets in
which illness separates you from
yourself.
>> Sort of the the psychological paradigm
that you just described, uh sort of
coming coming from
uh Gabor Mate is his name, where where
you know, it's like
people saw something in you that they
could
exploit in a way. Uh
>> And and I want to say to anyone who's
hearing this, that's not anyone's fault.
People we know culturally now more than
ever that people who are exploiters are
going to do exploiting. And they're
looking for the people they can do it to
in the most consequence-free way.
And that is not the fault of the person
being exploited. That's the fault of the
person doing the exploiting.
>> I also want to know how how that
paradigm fits or doesn't with
descriptions you give in the book of
sort of uh
abusive or near abusive sexual
relationships where you had feelings of
you know
like wanting to be degraded or or like
you
were seeking out
situations in which
seemingly like you could confirm the bad
feelings you had about yourself.
>> My experience was that there was
something about
recreating
a situation I had been in not by choice
with some measure of what appeared to be
my own free will [snorts]
that somehow made me think that if I
executed it right, I could erase the
thing that had happened before. And
maybe I will even be
loved for my ability to perform well in
this kind of dynamic. And it's
interesting because now like kink and
sub dom stuff and everybody's on field,
but like when I was 24 and these things
were happening to me, I thought I was
alone. I thought I was the biggest I
like would go home and I'd be like, I
cannot even look my parents in the eye.
No one has ever been a worse child than
me. And
of course these things have existed
since
the beginning of time. Now we have
language we have language for people to
identify their desires in a healthy way.
We also know that sometimes people use
this language to uh
excuse behavior that is actually not
consensual or not healthy.
And I think in the book I wanted to
capture the complexity of
placing yourself in a situation that you
knew was
at least to the outside world unsavory
and trying to find some shred of dignity
or romance in it.
And I think the saddest thing for me
looking back was the idea that I thought
at the other end of it there might be
something resembling love.
>> Yeah. Yeah. This is um
maybe a difficult question to have
perspective on or
maybe even a a little too
psychologically abstract in a way, but
do you do you
uh might there be ways in which your
the dynamics that you just described in
terms of the sort of like personal or
sexual relationships
had parallels in your relationship with
the public?
>> Yes. Like, you know, it's a classic.
It's like, I'm going to lean into what
people think I am, but I'm going to do
it my way. I'm going to find my version
of it. And actually
>> But leaning into a thing that you know
makes you feel bad.
>> 100%. And I think the thing that
concerned my parents is is this book
another iteration of that?
>> Yeah.
>> And I had to explain to them sort of
what I explained to you, which is like,
I had to get comfortable with the idea
that this is what I had to do to keep
like, I had to write this to keep living
my life in a way that felt felt true.
But I know people who and have been in a
dynamic where you're continuing to go in
and go in and go in and it's like the
girl in the horror movie where you're
like, "Don't go down the stairs."
She's going down the stairs. You know
why she's going down the stairs? Cuz
she's a [__] and she's going to get
killed. So, that's like
it 100% echoes it.
And what was also interesting was those
dynamics which were in life scary at
times lonely
those would be recreated on television
and people thought they were funny and
fun and at times sexy. And you know, I
didn't write Adam's character to be a
romantic hero. And by the end everyone
was like, "I want a boyfriend like that.
I want a boyfriend who throws
2 by 4s and spanks me. And that is not
what I was going for, but it was
certainly a lesson in what we desire
cannot be untangled from what we have
been through and what we fear. It just
can't.
>> I want to ask about two of sort of the
your central relationships during the
girls period.
>> Yeah.
>> And the first is with Jenny Konner. So
you So you write
So Jenny Konner co-showrunner um sort of
your what do you call like consigliere
during the show?
>> Yeah, she was my partner in making the
show and she was my teacher and she was
my best friend at the time.
>> and you
had this incredibly supportive
also kind of symbiotic relationship
while you were working on the show and
that
ultimately that relationship sort of
soured and it seems
that by the end of the book the
the conflict there or the tension there
is really around values. And
you imply that
sort of there was like a trans a
business kind of transactional
aspect
to your relationship with Jenny from her
perspective that was
sort of not quite with
what didn't align with what your goals
were, you know, what your values were
which you you in in the book say are
basically art and family. And I want to
know if your relationship with Jenny or
not if I want to know what your
relationship with Jenny
taught you about the difficulty of
being in business with friends.
>> I mean I have so much
that this is not like when I say I have
so much gratitude. I have so much
gratitude for Jenny. The amount of times
in a day that I think about something
that she taught me or I say a joke that
is deeply embedded in the history of our
friendship and sort of laugh with
myself. Like she was my
you know, I mean I remember my mom
saying like this is your first real
friend.
And I also
was
extremely naive about the fact that when
you work with people and your
creative financial futures are
intertwined, there are going to be
moments where that is just in tension
with friendship. I was not an adult and
I was
I still lived with my parents and I was
desperately looking for safety and for a
sense of security and for a sense of
something that was um
I just forgot the word for oh,
unconditional. Something that felt
unconditional and business relationships
are
>> They're conditional.
>> Yeah, by definition.
>> And I remember again, my parents who
come up a lot in this book, their
wisdom, my father being like, you know,
not everybody like says I love you to
everyone they work with and like sleeps
over at their house. And I look back at
that and I think that
I can recognize now as a 40-year-old the
inherent challenges of that and that in
a way I was looking for a different kind
of relationship than the one that work
can provide.
>> Is there uh
a way
that you can imagine that things would
have
developed with her that would have
allowed you to to continue working
together or do you think it was sort of
a necessary
break that had to happen?
>> I made a necessary break with
everything. So
>> Huh.
>> I don't think I mean, there was there's
a moment that I talk about in the book
where I
broke up with my business partner, I
broke up with my partner, I had a
hysterectomy, I stepped back from work.
It was It was like I went from
full-on to
like sitting in a back room in my
parents' apartment in silence collaging
letters together and like making like my
mom coming in and being like, "That's
really nice." Which like you've made a
collage that says see me or something.
Like it was not
it it was not a time where I was capable
of really keeping anything going.
And I'm not a big
So much has happened in my life that's
wonderful and so much has happened
that's challenging. I'm not a big redux
person. Like I look back and I go
I remember once I said to my mom like,
"I'm so glad you're my mom." And she was
like, "It could have been no other way."
And
there's so much it could have been no
other way in this story. And I like went
I had to detach from this entity that I
had created. And everyone who was
responsible for helping me keep that
entity alive.
>> Um the the
that line that your mom said, you know,
that it could have been no other way
sort of echoes uh a line that Adam
Driver says in the book where sort of
you guys are
kind of wrapping up your work together
on Girls. And you know, I I can't
remember if you're apologizing or you're
you're just sort of
>> We're sort of saying like look what's
happened.
>> he says something like, you know, it is
how it had to be.
>> Yeah. Um
>> That was my long-winded way of segueing
into an Adam Driver question.
>> Yeah.
>> Uh uh which you know, you the the Adam
Driver that you describe in the book
just as as a an artistic collaborator is
sort of this uh at least my reading of
it is kind of like a volatile extremely
intense
artist.
>> Yeah.
>> Uh who you know, who could get really
mad on set or you know, do things that
felt risky. What did you think was
driving that behavior on the set?
>> You know, I think that
that was all of our first job.
So, I wouldn't presume to know how
anyone I wouldn't say that Girls would
be a road map for how anyone behaved
anywhere else. It's like it was very
like seven strangers sent to live in a
house in Seattle. What's going to
happen? You know, a bunch of I mean,
it's
one thing that's miraculous is like no
one dated and no one
punched each other. Like it was in a way
we did the best you possibly could. And
always, and I hope I portray this in the
book, like Adam is a meticulous
artist.
And where he has to go to get there
is secondary to me to where he gets. And
I mean
I love watching him. I learned more from
him than anyone I've ever
stood across from on camera. I feel like
in a way like that was the best I'll
ever be at acting and I don't
I don't know if I could even
pull that off again because so much of
it came from what was being handed to
me. But you know, one person wants to be
left alone in the corner to
breathe. One person wants to be like
talking shop right until the minute we
go.
I once did scenes with a guy who used to
do the night at the Roxbury headbang
until the minute that we called action.
Um which is like a little weird during
sex scenes, but you know, it happens.
But um so I I think I've had a I think I
have a deeper understanding and
sometimes I I mean, I'm not a big I just
said I'm not a big Redux person, but
like
>> You did just write a memoir, so
>> just write a memoir.
And I think that like were I to go back
that
I would so not take that behavior
personally. Like I would understand
everyone's just
doing what they need to do to to make it
happen.
>> There's this scene in in the book um
involving you and Adam where it it seems
like there had
you know, the idea of you guys having
you two having a sexual relationship was
like in the air sort of and and you
make a plan for him to come to your
apartment and you know, he says yes and
this is this is in in your telling and
>> Like what are you talking about? That's
not in the book. I didn't put that in
the book.
>> [laughter]
>> And he gets there and calls calls up to
you and you don't answer the call
because it seems
you were
sort of
apprehensive about what the
sort of emotional fallout of sleeping
together might have been.
Um, I think
the word you use in the book is
you know, you were you were worried
about maybe some possible humiliation or
whatever it was and and
why like why was humiliation the the
thing that you were worried about
happening there?
>> I mean it's just I was afraid about
humiliation happening everywhere. So
and I also want to say like when you're
that age
there's this like I remember in college
you go out at night and it's like
every single you look around at like
your 15 guy friends and it's like who's
going to kiss who tonight? Like it's so
there's something in the air all the
time but it might mean nothing and I
think in that relationship what I was
trying to capture was not necessarily
um
specific to that dynamic but was this
feeling like we were all coming out of
that phase and entering this adult
professional phase where we were still
kind of
moving through the world in this
youthful way where it was all ripe with
possibility and not saying what we felt
and trying to read each other's signals
and there was something
scary about it and there was something
glamorous about it and
and then having an adult awakening that
um
having an adult awakening that
that wasn't always um
I had you know I I had been so of the
mind that like
any scrap of
positive male attention was going to
automatically
elevate me to some I don't know so I
wouldn't be scared of um suddenly I
would never be afraid of death again but
um
and then realizing actually that the
supreme force was the work and that
everything had to much like Adams acting
everything had to be in service of that
work.
>> Uh the the um
sort of another of the central
relationships you write it in about in
the book is your relationship with Jack
Antonoff.
>> Yeah.
>> And
I want to know how
fame
helped deepen that relationship
and then how fame also may have
destabilized that relationship.
>> So
I'll just start with saying like it's so
thrilling now to look
at sort of
now to look at that to have met this
person you know the week that his first
single came out and to see the
trajectory of his career and his powers
it's a unique privilege to have every
breakup song you love written by your
ex.
I feel blessed.
Um
when I was I talk about this in book but
when I was at rehab this girl kept
playing this song or this pink song over
and over and over again and at one point
I was like
my ex-boyfriend wrote that and she
looked at me like okay lady
and I've and I'm the queen of England
but um what I tried to capture in the
book is like
you know I was very I was a really late
bloomer so that was my first you know a
lot of people are like had my high
school boyfriend then I had my college
boyfriend. I didn't even have a um
a language to think that like when you I
felt like you fall in love with someone
and then you're together for the rest of
your life. Like I was so you know my
parents got together when they were 27,
they're 76 now. They like met in Soho as
young artists. I was like okay, I'm
perfectly on time. Here we go. And
something I talk about in the book is
like that
ending was extremely
um intense for me in a way where I
looked around and I was like, is
everybody this upset about their
breakup? But it was also because of what
it represented publicly for me, which
was the idea that like
if you have this dynamic
intelligent, talented man who is signing
off on you, how bad could you really be?
>> Right. Right. Yeah. I I just you know as
I've not experienced a relationship with
a famous person, but uh
there I would I would think there's got
to be something where
like sort of exhilarating or
intoxicating or it's like you're you're
you're super cool and I'm super cool and
the world's telling us we're all super
cool and like I love you and I love you
and everything's super awesome and then
like but then at some point life has to
happen and it's it's like
>> Well also what delays life more than the
things that prevent you from having to
deal with life, right? Are
like lots of
external support, money. I'm like no one
under 30 should be given any money
because then they can just like play
house for as long as they want and
something that I really respect about
Jack and Love is he's like a real
entertainer. He brings like positivity
and joy and has a deep deep connection
with his audience and cares and
I'm a much
different internal weird
other kind of creature and it's like
it's like
I don't know what it is. It's like we
have On the one hand we have
Bruce Springsteen and on the other hand
we have
I don't know what I I was about to be
like Edna St. Vincent Millay after she
got addicted to opium and fell down the
stairs.
And they're living together in an
apartment. It's an interesting reality
show.
Um
and it was so special to have that buddy
through everything.
But then life does happen and the most
intense version of life happening is
illness. And
I try to make it really clear in the
book that any young person who was
around that and thought
this isn't what I want my life to look
like right now.
I have no
blame because I was like this isn't what
I want my life to look like either.
>> Um
you're pretty coy about who the teen pop
star
was
in that Jack is hanging around with in
the book.
>> pop star in the book, David. You
misread.
You misread.
>> Do you think it would be a
giving people a green light
of pure heroin
to to really say who the pop star was?
>> You rehearsed that for. That was really
good.
>> [laughter]
>> But it was Connie Francis.
>> interesting.
>> Yeah, wow. It was Connie Francis.
>> Oh, interesting.
Uh
you know, I I'm conscious of the time. I
don't want you to feel trapped here, but
I feel like I'm just hopscotching around
cuz there's so much in the book and it's
hard. But um
>> [laughter]
>> Can I ask about rehab now?
>> Yeah, of course. I
loved rehab. I did. I genuinely did.
>> And just just for for sort of
chronological context. So this is
happening so girls is done
>> Girls finished in in September of 2016.
It's going to be 10 years this year.
>> You kind of
bottom out for a and so probably it's
about 20
>> April of 2018. I turned 32 the day that
I left. And I'm about to be 40. So I've
been sober for it'll be
willing um
8 years in April.
>> Good for you.
>> Thank you.
>> Yeah. It's been a really
good thing for me. Something that I
didn't know I needed because I never
drank, I never smoked weed. Pretty much
until the minute I got there, I had no
idea that I belonged there. I thought I
was following doctor's instructions a
little too well, and suddenly I realized
that I had a like many American people a
dependent relationship with
pharmaceuticals, and that
I was lucky enough that I could go
somewhere and work through that rather
than sort of like so many people have
to, you know, grip the walls in their
car or their bedroom, and
and um
and it was a really
important
page-turn experience. A lot of addiction
is feeling a positive feeling that is in
direct contrast with the rest of your
life looks like. Your life is falling
apart, and you're like sitting on your
bed in a good mood. There's nothing in
that. And I want to have good feelings
that like you can explore and move
through and are layered. I want to have
good feelings where you look under them
and there's more good feelings.
>> You know,
earlier in the conversation
you know, you said you kind of felt like
you were
born with certain feelings about
yourself. And those uh
feelings
you know, then had all sorts of
ramifications for
>> Yeah.
>> the life you led and the feelings that
you were comfortable with, and the
feelings that you pursued. And uh
I want to just throw a theory my theory
out for you.
>> I was born with it is like a cop-out. Do
you know what I mean? It's not actually
wanting to
going I was born that way. Great Lady
Gaga song. Very positive message. This
is a different story. So, yes, I'd love
your theory. Thank you, David.
>> And you tell me if it's hooey, and but
um
I I wondered if because of your chronic
illness
your
normal state, the state of being
which was actually comfortable for you
was a state of extreme discomfort. And
as a result, in all these different
ways, whether it's your relationship
with the public or maybe with other
people, or your relationship sexually,
you
put yourself in positions where you were
going to feel bad.
>> Yeah.
>> Because feeling bad was your baseline.
>> I think that's
I'm taking that back to therapy, David.
That's really
thoughtful and compelling
and true.
And the yes, and I would add cuz there's
no no, is
that
when you're in pain, the only thing that
overrides it is more pain and different
pain. That's why I have so many tattoos,
cuz like if you're in pain and then
somebody's
tattooing you for an hour, that's what
you're focused on.
And if you're in pain and somebody else
takes the reins and puts you through an
experience,
that's what you're focused on. And
it's interesting because my capacity for
discomfort has also been something that
has helped me a lot in my life. My
ability to withstand
stress, my ability to deal with like
like my husband is like
you have like more
[__] going on in an hour than I do the
entire year. He's like, if I
was having your day, which is just a
normal day doing show business things,
he's like I would go to bed and I
wouldn't get up. The first time that we
we created a show together, the show too
much, um
and we got our first review and he was
awake and he gets the Guardian and it
was a like one star and he threw up. And
I like I turned into like a coach. I was
like do you like your life? You got to
pay to play, brother. Like I I got I
became someone completely different. But
it was like that ability to handle
negative inputs. I'm not going to say
with elegance cuz that's not a word
anyone would associate with me, but at
least with a certain kind of stoicism
and moving ahead is something that has
like sustained me and has certainly come
from being sick.
>> So let me this is this will be the final
question for this go round. This go
round.
The um
So
you're someone who
particularly early in your career was
criticized for oversharing.
This term oversharing. And
I want to know
what you've learned
up to this point from
having the experience of
of sharing so so deeply in
in your art on
uh
you know arguably overlong Instagram
comments.
>> Yeah, some people some people might say
they're long. I might say I'm using the
medium in a fresh new way, David.
>> Uh
>> Who says Instagram is not a platform for
half-baked essays about your
relationship to bikinis?
>> Uh
And and now also ha- having shared so
deeply
and in such detailed fashion in the
book.
>> Yeah.
>> So so
what do what do you now understand about
sort of processing who you are
in kind of a public fashion?
>> Well, it's interesting like the idea of
oversharing cuz now we have all these
words like trauma dumping or like the
idea that like you can share in a way
that's sort of like and you can share in
a way that's a violation to other
people. Like I now and I'm not people
think I'm joking, but I'll like be
having conversations be like are you
comfortable with me sharing something
about sexual violence? And they're like,
what? Like I I never want to people will
make the choice to pick up my book,
they'll know what it will be, but I'm
actually like
I think I try to be quite conscious of
in life
like not loading people up with stuff
that they don't need. And I certainly
have lots of people come up to me in the
street and load me up with stuff I might
not need, but I like it anyway.
Keep it coming. And I think that
I also think that oversharing is a label
that's almost exclusively assigned to
women. Like a memoir about the same
things for a man would be considered
brave, incisive, and
>> rebellious.
>> rebellious. Like we're having we're
having fun here.
>> That's
all the words. And
and the idea is like your
feminine, female, whatever exper- queer,
whatever it may like insert experience
belongs
behind closed doors where it was meant
you know, like keep it
stuff it down and get back on your
fainting couch. And I
always as
a kid looked around and felt frustrated
by what people weren't saying. I was
always trying to understand like when
we're making movies we're like, "What's
the note behind the note?" Like I was
like, "I know there's something I'm
missing and I know there's something
people aren't saying and I don't like
this feeling of being on the other
side."
I don't know who someone said it.
There's a quote someone wrote. I don't
like being on the other side of secrets.
I don't like it and so
when I was
old enough to write and share my work,
it felt
important to me to crack that. And when
I have felt It's not even about how
other people have reacted. When I
haven't felt satisfied with my own work
is when I've tried to take a complex
thought and trivialize it. Like I'm no
longer interested in like big sweeping
statements about female sexuality or
the experience or like I'm interested in
long-term exploration of topics that I
will return to again and again hopefully
till I'm a very old lady.
>> [music]
>> And I'm looking forward to returning
some of these to some of these topics
with you.
>> [laughter]
>> Thank you so much. Thank you.
>> Thank [music] you.
On the interview, we talked to our guest
twice. So a week later, Lena Dunham and
I spoke again after she got input on our
first conversation from her therapist.
Okay.
>> Will I get in trouble if I bring a La
Colombe latte by my face occasionally?
>> I don't think so.
>> Okay, good. I didn't know if there was
like a branding issue. Okay, maybe they
won't want to be associated with me.
>> Um but you know, Lena, you do feel so
or you seem to me so at peace
or reconciled maybe would be a better
word
with so much of what you write about in
the book, but there is one
uh area where
I sort of
intuit that maybe you don't feel
um quite as much at peace and and that's
around the
like the statement that you put out in
2020 2017.
Yeah. Um you which you write about in in
the book in in like a slightly
oblique way, but you know, you you
defended uh the Girls writer Murray
Miller uh against accusations of rape.
You later apologized for it for for that
defense. Uh you also write about in the
book how you you know, I think maybe you
had
>> [clears throat]
>> you were not in in a great head space at
that time. You were sort of in a
confused uh place. Um
>> I was on drugs. It's okay to say that I
was on drugs. And that's Yeah.
>> But it it it seems
like that still sort of weighs heavily
on you. So, and I was just wondering
like have you forgiven yourself for
that?
>> I think And by the way, I didn't say I
was on drugs to kind of like create a
blanket excuse. Just when you said
confused headspace, I was like, "No need
to No need to be polite about it."
>> Yeah.
>> I think what I was trying to get The
reason I wrote about it in an oblique
way is just because I felt like it that
story touches on a lot of other people's
lives, and I struggled with whether to
even include it, but it felt
important because it was a real bottom
in my sense of myself and my sense of
my relationship to the public. And as
for the question of will I ever forgive
myself or will I think that
I think what I was trying to say is that
there were lots of things that publicly
I look back and I go, "That was so dumb.
That was so dumb how people responded.
That was so I did not have to
apologize. That The entire thing was a
strange dance, but that was one where
I did have to apologize, and I'm
grateful that I had the opportunity to.
And
I can only hope that the way that I
included it in the book won't feel
gratuitous or like it dredges too much
up for
other people. And it was um It was
definitely a dance to figure out how to
do that.
>> I have another question that connects to
uh
my my big theory I had about some of
your behavior from from from
>> the way, I did You know how I said I'm
going to take your theory to my
therapist?
>> Yeah.
>> I did. And
I mean, she seemed pretty in She seemed
to agree. She seemed to think like,
"Yeah, that guy's got the got this got
the joint cased. Then she offered um
some further thoughts
that had to do with my childhood and I
was like, I got to go sleep.
>> [laughter]
>> Um
okay, so let let let me let me
air it out. So, you know
we were talking about how
you know, sort of people could work
could really just be mean to you. Like
you became a a punching bag and I
you sort of was wondering if if you were
saying
>> cuz it was safe to do it on the right
and it was safe to do it on the left.
And we do need things like that.
>> [laughter]
>> Sorry, don't make me laugh. I'm asking a
serious question. But uh um but you
know, the the thing I I left out of that
was
you know, and so sort of my theory was
that, you know, in in some ways maybe,
you know, you you were looking to feel
bad. But the thing the thing I I left
out of that was of course that you were
at times
saying provocative things that sort of
made people angry or or or irritated,
you know? And
you know, I don't I don't I don't want
to go through the list. Uh
but you know, I I just wondered if you
know, there there obviously was a way in
which you were interested in pushing
boundaries. And you've probably always I
think you even write about in the book.
You've always been interested in pushing
boundaries. But I wondered if maybe the
thing that you were interested in wasn't
just the pushing of the boundary, but
getting scolded for pushing the
boundary. You know, self-awareness
>> you know, there there obviously was a
way in which you were interested in
pushing boundaries
and you've probably always I think you
even write about in the book. You've
always been interested in pushing
boundaries. Yeah. But I wondered if
maybe the thing that you were interested
in wasn't just the pushing of the
boundary, but getting scolded for
pushing the boundary. You know,
self-awareness like 20 so I wouldn't say
it's the specialty of the house for
20-somethings.
So, I probably wouldn't have been able
to hear that and receive that when
things were going on. I mean, my
it was a complicated mix because I also
like
I was always interested in pushing
boundaries, but I also came from a very
boundary pushing place. Like
>> Right.
>> I was 10 and like going to see an art
show where it was like a woman sold
herself to an art collector as the art.
And so you're watching a video of the
two of them having sex and I'm standing
there and watching it between my
parents. Like my sense of what was
was like naughty behavior was different.
Like you know, one of my father's big
thought things he always said when we
were kids is there are no bad thoughts,
only bad actions.
A lot of people think there are bad
thoughts.
And that you're supposed to I mean a lot
of the and that you're supposed to keep
your bad thoughts to yourself.
And I always thought like if we're all
just saying what our worst thoughts are,
then we're saying them and we don't
aren't alone with them and isn't that
better? So there was a part of me that
just had a really different like world
view, but also the thing that you're
saying is 100% accurate, too. Like I And
I think I said to you in the last
interview is like one of the great
conflicts of my life is that I like to
do and make whatever I want and then
have no one ever be mad about it. And I
remember once saying that to my parents
and my mom being like, "Well, that's
actually the most self-aware thing
you've ever said."
>> [laughter]
>> You know, so so one thing that actually
uh I was thinking about with the book
was uh something that felt a little
absent uh for me. And and that was um
you know, the book is so much about the
life uh
and I felt it it wasn't so much about
the art. You know, sort of where where
the art comes from, who who, you know,
sort of what you were trying to convey
at different uh parts of your career,
what you know, what you took from the
artists who were important to you. Um
And I know all that stuff can can be
very hard for artists to write about.
Sometimes they don't even know the
answers to to those kinds of questions.
But was that an intentional choice on
your part?
>> The first part is that
there were so many other people
telling us what they thought that Girls
was about in positive ways, in negative
ways.
Practically more people talking about
what it was about than even watch the
show. So many people had thoughts and
and I also
learned to sort of keep
It was like it was so precious to me
what I was maybe actually trying to say
and so expansive that it was easier to
talk about other things and to keep that
stuff close to the vest. But then also
I'm still so in my life as a
writer and as a director and it grows
and it changes it all the time.
And so there's something about talking
about your
sort of vision for your work or your or
your very specific creative interest
that feels like you're 88 and like
looking back on
a complete life.
But now that you're saying it I mean
those when you said, you know, what you
took from the artist that were important
to you. That could be a whole separate
book in which I talked about who I was
obsessed with at any given time and what
I took from their life and what I took
from their work and and so it was almost
too vast to touch, I think.
>> Yeah. You know, the what you just said
about how there was so much discussion
around the work. Um
you know, it's
it's obvious that sort of the the insane
amount of attention you were getting
back then.
Um you know, it's it's receded. You're
not the the focus of the of scrutiny in
the same way.
>> No.
>> Is there anything that feels
freeing
creatively about not sort of being a a
sort of a public figure in the same way
because I'm just thinking of an example
like I was trying to think of
uh analogies earlier.
When I was thinking about this question
I and it's not a perfect analogy, but
you'll get what I mean. There's somebody
like um you know, like a Paul Newman who
who arguably when he stopped being like
tippy top of the A-list leading man and
started doing kind of quieter smaller
more character parts like his work
actually got kind of more interesting in
a in a way. I wonder if if sort of that
resonates for you at all.
>> I mean, I would love to feel analogous
to
still tanned and sexy midlife Paul
Newman taking on
more independent [clears throat] and
character roles. So thank you.
I mean for me personally, I can
everything feels freeing about it.
>> Oh, good.
>> And now
it's this kind of miraculous thing where
I get to make work that's exciting to
me. Of course, there are projects still
that interest me that I know are not
going to necessarily [clears throat]
excite, you know, some of the things
when I go like you know, I'd love to do
a slow and meandering depiction of women
who spent time around Jack Kerouac.
That's not going to like
light up the airwaves, but I get to work
a lot. I have time to think. I have time
to dream. I'm engaged with so many other
artists that are fast compelling to me.
Every day has like an exciting creative
wrinkle to it. I think some people there
there are people who are really good at
being artists and also maintaining this
sort of dance that you do with the
public and it wasn't my gift and I also
just had to realize that everybody's
capacity is different and I thought that
what I had to prove was that I had the
that I could take it all that I was
tough enough to take it all. And now
that is not doesn't seem like an
important
character trait to me and I
feel that I was always [music]
sort of meant to be where I am now.
>> Lila, I really enjoyed speaking with
you. Thank you very much.
>> It was a really a pleasure, David. Thank
you.
>> I'm Lulu Garcia Navarro.
>> And I'm David Marchese.
>> And we're the hosts of The Interview, an
audio and video podcast from The New
York Times.
>> Every week we interview fascinating and
influential people from all walks of
life.
>> Subscribe to our YouTube channel so
you'll never miss an episode.